doc/migration_guide.md, before:

# Migration guide

This guide covers the migration from the [legacy](https://github.com/ros-industrial/industrial_ci/tree/legacy) version.

## What's new?

The new version comes with a number of improvements:

* Added support for catkin_make, catkin_make_isolated and colcon
* Use [vcstool](https://github.com/dirk-thomas/vcstool)(`vcs`) instead of `wstool` to support \*.rosinstall and \*.repos files
* Added support for ROS2, and vcstool (rosinstall or repos files)
* Separate upstream and downstream [workspaces](index.rst#workspace-management), even for pre-release run_tests
* Fine-grained [hook system](index.rst#customize-within-the-ci-process) for customization
* Writable target folder

## What's the catch?

Some features are not supported anymore:

* Support of ROS hydro
* Devel space builds
* Testing installed \*.test files
* Job control settings have been removed for now

If you depend on these, you can still use the [legacy](https://github.com/ros-industrial/industrial_ci/tree/legacy) version.

## How can I migrate?
There is a big chance that the new version works out of the box.
However, per default the build now uses the main ROS repository (`ROS_REPO=ros`) instead of the *shadow-fixed* version (`ROS_REPO=ros-shadow-fixed`).
Furthermore, the workspace layout and the locations are changed.

Special care must be taken, if you use any of these variables:

* [`ABICHECK_URL`](#abicheck_url)
* [`ADDITIONAL_DEBS`](#additional_debs)
* [`AFTER_SCRIPT`](#after_script)
* [`APTKEY_STORE_HTTPS`](#aptkey_store_https)
* [`APTKEY_STORE_SKS`](#aptkey_store_sks)
* [`AFTER_SCRIPT`](#after_script)
* [`BEFORE_SCRIPT`](#before_script)
* [`BUILD_PKGS_WHITELIST`](#build_pkgs_whitelist)
* [`BUILDER`](#builder)
* [`CATKIN_CONFIG`](#catkin_config)
* [`CATKIN_PARALLEL_JOBS`](#catkin_parallel_jobs)
* [`CATKIN_PARALLEL_TEST_JOBS`](#catkin_parallel_test_jobs)
* [`CMAKE_ARGS`](#cmake_args)
* [`DOCKER_BASE_IMAGE`](#docker_base_image)
* [`DOCKER_FILE`](#docker_file)
* [`DOCKER_IMAGE`](#docker_image)
* [`HASHKEY_SKS`](#hashkey_sks)
* [`NOT_TEST_INSTALL`](#not_test_install)
* [`PKGS_DOWNSTREAM`](#pkgs_downstream)
* [`ROSINSTALL_FILENAME`](#rosinstall_filename)
* [`ROS_PARALLEL_JOBS`](#ros_parallel_jobs)
* [`ROS_PARALLEL_TEST_JOBS`](#ros_parallel_test_jobs)
* [`ROS_REPOSITORY_PATH`](#ros_repository_path)
* [`TARGET_PKGS`](#target_pkgs)
* [`UBUNTU_OS_CODE_NAME`](#ubuntu_os_code_name)
* [`UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE`](#upstream_workspace)
* [`USE_DEB`](#use_deb)
* [`VERBOSE_OUTPUT`](#verbose_output)
* [`VERBOSE_TESTS`](#verbose_tests)
* [`USE_MOCKUP`](#use_mockup)

## Changes summary

### Docker images

Instead of creating a new Docker image on every build, `industrial_ci` uses the [official ROS images](https://hub.docker.com/_/ros/) per default for ROS kinetic and newer (ROS_REPO=ros/ros2 only).
You can set `DEFAULT_DOCKER_IMAGE=''` to opt-out.

### Workspace layout

The workspace layout has changed (new [workspace management](index.rst#workspace-management)).
The target workspace is now located in `~/target_ws`.
The upstream workspace packages are now located in `~/upstream_ws`.

### Job control

`industrial_ci` does not set defaults for the number of jobs anymore.
In addition the job-control options got removed for the time being.

### Hook system

The customization support via `BEFORE_SCRIPT` and `AFTER_SCRIPT` has been refactored into a flexible [hook system](index.rst#customize-within-the-ci-process), which offers script support for every step in the workflow.

The new system can read exposed variables and use the `industrial_ci` functions.
The [workspace layout has changed](#workspace-layout), so your scripts might need to get adapted accordingly.
To simplify the migration the script hooks can read the workspace location from the `base_ws` (ABI check only), `downstream_ws`,`target_ws` and `upstream_ws` variables.
In addition steps that deal with workspaces expose the `current_ws` variable.
Please note that the variables can be used in the script option itself, but not in invoked scripts.
You have to pass them into your script, e.g.
```
AFTER_SETUP_UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE='./my_script.sh "$current_ws"'
```
(*For Gitlab CI you have to use `$$variable` to prevent the premature substitution*)

Furthermore, the hook will get run without a ROS environment (`setup.bash`).
If you need this environment, you can use the `rosenv` helper.
Optionally, it takes a command to be executed.

Examples:

* `AFTER_SETUP_UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE='rosenv && echo "$ROS_DISTRO'"`
* `AFTER_SETUP_UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE='rosenv ./my_script.sh'`

## Affected variables

### ABICHECK_URL

Everything should work as before, but git-protocol will get used by default.
In addition, the extended [definition syntax](index.rst#workspace-definition) is supported.

### ADDITIONAL_DEBS

This variable is still supported and is now implemented for all tests.

### AFTER_SCRIPT

This variable is still supported, but the [script environment has changed](#hook-system).

### APTKEY_STORE_HTTPS

It is not a fallback for [`APTKEY_STORE_SKS`](#aptkey_store_sks) anymore, but will disable it and download the key from the provided URL directly.

### APTKEY_STORE_SKS

Will only be used if [`APTKEY_STORE_HTTPS`](#aptkey_store_https) is not set, without a fall-back.

### BEFORE_SCRIPT

Due to the new [workspace management](index.rst#workspace-management), the `BEFORE_SCRIPT` variable became ambiguous and was therefore removed.
However, the new [hook system](index.rst#customize-within-the-ci-process) offers a lot of alternatives.

If you did not use [`UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE`](#upstream_workspace)(other than `debian`) or [`USE_DEB=false`](#use_deb), you can just substitute `BEFORE_SCRIPT` with `AFTER_SETUP_TARGET_WORKSPACE`. This will execute your script in the same sequence as before.
If you did use the upstream settings, you might need to substitute with `AFTER_SETUP_UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE` (or both).

In general you can as well use any other hook that is suitable for your script.
Please note that the [script environment has changed](#hook-system).

### BUILD_PKGS_WHITELIST

This variable is not supported anymore.
Instead, you could remove the unrelated folders (see [workspace management](index.rst#workspace-management)).

### BUILDER

This variable was not used before, but it was listed as an option.
If you specified it anyway, please set it to `catkin_tools` or remove it to allow for automatic selection.

### CATKIN_CONFIG

This variable is not supported anymore.
As an alternative you could set:
* `CC` and `CFLAGS` for C compiler settings
* `CXX` and `CPPFLAGS`/`CXXLAGS` for C++ compiler settings
* `CMAKE_ARGS` for CMake settings (works for catkin_tools and colcon)

If you need catkin_tools-specific settings, especially `--no-install`, you should use the [legacy](https://github.com/ros-industrial/industrial_ci/tree/legacy) version.
Or even better: Add support for the install space.

### CATKIN_PARALLEL_JOBS

This is not supported anymore (see [job control](#job-control)]) as well.
Just try your build without this setting.
If it does not work, you should review the package dependencies in your repository.

### CATKIN_PARALLEL_TEST_JOBS

This is not supported anymore (see [job control](#job-control)]) as well.
Just try your build without this setting.
Please [open an issue](https://github.com/ros-industrial/industrial_ci/issues/new) if you really depend on this.

### CMAKE_ARGS

This variable was introduced recently and is still supported, but its content will be passed to all workspaces.
`DOWNSTREAM_CMAKE_ARGS`, `TARGET_CMAKE_ARGS` and `UPSTREAM_CMAKE_ARGS` can be used for more fine-grained control.

### DOCKER_BASE_IMAGE

This variable is still supported, but the [workspace layout has changed](#workspace-layout).

### DOCKER_FILE

This variable is still supported, but the [workspace layout has changed](#workspace-layout).

### DOCKER_IMAGE

This variable is still supported, but the [workspace layout has changed](#workspace-layout).

### HASHKEY_SKS

Will only be used if [`APTKEY_STORE_HTTPS`](#aptkey_store_https) is not set.

### NOT_TEST_INSTALL

This feature was removed, please use the [legacy](https://github.com/ros-industrial/industrial_ci/tree/legacy) version.

### PKGS_DOWNSTREAM

This variable is not supported anymore.
Instead, you could specify `DOWNSTREAM_WORKSPACE` (see [workspace management](index.rst#workspace-management)).

### ROSINSTALL_FILENAME

This variable is deprecated, and should get migrated.

If you do not set `UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE=file` as well, `ROSINSTALL_FILENAME` can just be removed.
Otherwise, set `UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE` to the value of `$ROSINSTALL_FILENAME` or `$ROSINSTALL_FILENAME.$ROS_DISTRO` explicitly (no auto-branching anymore).
If your rosinstall file contains your target repository as well, you might want to [filter](index.rst#workspace-management) it out:
`UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE=my_file_name -path_to_target_repo`.

### ROS_PARALLEL_JOBS

This variable does not get processed by `industrial_ci` anymore, instead it just gets passed to the build tool.
Just try your build without this setting.
If it does not work, you should review the package dependencies in your repository.

### ROS_PARALLEL_TEST_JOBS

This is not supported anymore (see [job control](#job-control)]) as well.
Just try your build without this setting.
Please [open an issue](https://github.com/ros-industrial/industrial_ci/issues/new) if you really depend on this.

### ROS_REPOSITORY_PATH

This variable is supported as-is.
If it is set to `http://packages.ros.org/ros-shadow-fixed/ubuntu`, it could get shortened to `ROS_REPO=ros-shadow-fixed`.
If it is set to `http://packages.ros.org/ros/ubuntu`, it can be removed or replaced by `ROS_REPO=ros` (default) to make `industrial_ci` use the [official ROS Docker](https://hub.docker.com/_/ros) images, if possible.

### TARGET_PKGS

This variable is not supported anymore.
Instead, you could remove the unrelated folders (see [workspace management](index.rst#workspace-management)).

### UBUNTU_OS_CODE_NAME

Still works, but is deprecated. Just substitute it with `OS_CODE_NAME`

### UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE

`UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE=debian` is superfluous and can simply get removed.
In case of `UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE=file` it can get set to the value of `$ROSINSTALL_FILENAME` (default: .travis.rosinstall) or `$ROSINSTALL_FILENAME.$ROS_DISTRO` explicitly (no auto-branching anymore).

If your rosinstall file contains your target repository as well, you might want to [filter](index.rst#workspace-management) it out:
`UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE=my_file_name_or_URL -path_to_target_repo`.

### USE_DEB

`USE_DEB=true` is superfluous and can simply get removed.
`USE_DEB=false` is the same as [`UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE=file`] and should [get migrated](#upstream_workspace).

### USE_MOCKUP

Is not used anymore, just substitute it with `TARGET_WORKSPACE`

### VERBOSE_OUTPUT

Is only implemented for `BUILDER=catkin_tools`

### VERBOSE_TESTS

Is only implemented for `BUILDER=catkin_tools`

Commit message:

use master branch in documentation

doc/migration_guide.md, after:

# Migration guide

This guide covers the migration from the [legacy](https://github.com/ros-industrial/industrial_ci/tree/legacy) version.

## What's new?

The new version comes with a number of improvements:

* Added support for catkin_make, catkin_make_isolated and colcon
* Use [vcstool](https://github.com/dirk-thomas/vcstool)(`vcs`) instead of `wstool` to support \*.rosinstall and \*.repos files
* Added support for ROS2, and vcstool (rosinstall or repos files)
* Separate upstream and downstream [workspaces](index.rst#workspace-management), even for pre-release run_tests
* Fine-grained [hook system](index.rst#customize-within-the-ci-process) for customization
* Writable target folder

## What's the catch?

Some features are not supported anymore:

* Support of ROS hydro
* Devel space builds
* Testing installed \*.test files
* Job control settings have been removed for now

If you depend on these, you can still use the [legacy](https://github.com/ros-industrial/industrial_ci/tree/legacy) version.

## How can I migrate?

First of all, you have to switch to the master branch in your CI config:
```
git clone --quiet --depth 1 https://github.com/ros-industrial/industrial_ci.git .industrial_ci -b master
```

There is a big chance that the new version works out of the box.
However, per default the build now uses the main ROS repository (`ROS_REPO=ros`) instead of the *shadow-fixed* version (`ROS_REPO=ros-shadow-fixed`).
Furthermore, the workspace layout and the locations are changed.

Special care must be taken, if you use any of these variables:

* [`ABICHECK_URL`](#abicheck_url)
* [`ADDITIONAL_DEBS`](#additional_debs)
* [`AFTER_SCRIPT`](#after_script)
* [`APTKEY_STORE_HTTPS`](#aptkey_store_https)
* [`APTKEY_STORE_SKS`](#aptkey_store_sks)
* [`AFTER_SCRIPT`](#after_script)
* [`BEFORE_SCRIPT`](#before_script)
* [`BUILD_PKGS_WHITELIST`](#build_pkgs_whitelist)
* [`BUILDER`](#builder)
* [`CATKIN_CONFIG`](#catkin_config)
* [`CATKIN_PARALLEL_JOBS`](#catkin_parallel_jobs)
* [`CATKIN_PARALLEL_TEST_JOBS`](#catkin_parallel_test_jobs)
* [`CMAKE_ARGS`](#cmake_args)
* [`DOCKER_BASE_IMAGE`](#docker_base_image)
* [`DOCKER_FILE`](#docker_file)
* [`DOCKER_IMAGE`](#docker_image)
* [`HASHKEY_SKS`](#hashkey_sks)
* [`NOT_TEST_INSTALL`](#not_test_install)
* [`PKGS_DOWNSTREAM`](#pkgs_downstream)
* [`ROSINSTALL_FILENAME`](#rosinstall_filename)
* [`ROS_PARALLEL_JOBS`](#ros_parallel_jobs)
* [`ROS_PARALLEL_TEST_JOBS`](#ros_parallel_test_jobs)
* [`ROS_REPOSITORY_PATH`](#ros_repository_path)
* [`TARGET_PKGS`](#target_pkgs)
* [`UBUNTU_OS_CODE_NAME`](#ubuntu_os_code_name)
* [`UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE`](#upstream_workspace)
* [`USE_DEB`](#use_deb)
* [`VERBOSE_OUTPUT`](#verbose_output)
* [`VERBOSE_TESTS`](#verbose_tests)
* [`USE_MOCKUP`](#use_mockup)

## Changes summary

### Docker images

Instead of creating a new Docker image on every build, `industrial_ci` uses the [official ROS images](https://hub.docker.com/_/ros/) per default for ROS kinetic and newer (ROS_REPO=ros/ros2 only).
You can set `DEFAULT_DOCKER_IMAGE=''` to opt-out.

### Workspace layout

The workspace layout has changed (new [workspace management](index.rst#workspace-management)).
The target workspace is now located in `~/target_ws`.
The upstream workspace packages are now located in `~/upstream_ws`.

### Job control

`industrial_ci` does not set defaults for the number of jobs anymore.
In addition the job-control options got removed for the time being.

### Hook system

The customization support via `BEFORE_SCRIPT` and `AFTER_SCRIPT` has been refactored into a flexible [hook system](index.rst#customize-within-the-ci-process), which offers script support for every step in the workflow.

The new system can read exposed variables and use the `industrial_ci` functions.
The [workspace layout has changed](#workspace-layout), so your scripts might need to get adapted accordingly.
To simplify the migration the script hooks can read the workspace location from the `base_ws` (ABI check only), `downstream_ws`,`target_ws` and `upstream_ws` variables.
In addition steps that deal with workspaces expose the `current_ws` variable.
Please note that the variables can be used in the script option itself, but not in invoked scripts.
You have to pass them into your script, e.g.
```
AFTER_SETUP_UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE='./my_script.sh "$current_ws"'
```
(*For Gitlab CI you have to use `$$variable` to prevent the premature substitution*)

Furthermore, the hook will get run without a ROS environment (`setup.bash`).
If you need this environment, you can use the `rosenv` helper.
Optionally, it takes a command to be executed.

Examples:

* `AFTER_SETUP_UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE='rosenv && echo "$ROS_DISTRO'"`
* `AFTER_SETUP_UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE='rosenv ./my_script.sh'`

## Affected variables

### ABICHECK_URL

Everything should work as before, but git-protocol will get used by default.
In addition, the extended [definition syntax](index.rst#workspace-definition) is supported.

### ADDITIONAL_DEBS

This variable is still supported and is now implemented for all tests.

### AFTER_SCRIPT

This variable is still supported, but the [script environment has changed](#hook-system).

### APTKEY_STORE_HTTPS

It is not a fallback for [`APTKEY_STORE_SKS`](#aptkey_store_sks) anymore, but will disable it and download the key from the provided URL directly.

### APTKEY_STORE_SKS

Will only be used if [`APTKEY_STORE_HTTPS`](#aptkey_store_https) is not set, without a fall-back.

### BEFORE_SCRIPT

Due to the new [workspace management](index.rst#workspace-management), the `BEFORE_SCRIPT` variable became ambiguous and was therefore removed.
However, the new [hook system](index.rst#customize-within-the-ci-process) offers a lot of alternatives.

If you did not use [`UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE`](#upstream_workspace)(other than `debian`) or [`USE_DEB=false`](#use_deb), you can just substitute `BEFORE_SCRIPT` with `AFTER_SETUP_TARGET_WORKSPACE`. This will execute your script in the same sequence as before.
If you did use the upstream settings, you might need to substitute with `AFTER_SETUP_UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE` (or both).

In general you can as well use any other hook that is suitable for your script.
Please note that the [script environment has changed](#hook-system).

### BUILD_PKGS_WHITELIST

This variable is not supported anymore.
Instead, you could remove the unrelated folders (see [workspace management](index.rst#workspace-management)).

### BUILDER

This variable was not used before, but it was listed as an option.
If you specified it anyway, please set it to `catkin_tools` or remove it to allow for automatic selection.

### CATKIN_CONFIG

This variable is not supported anymore.
As an alternative you could set:
* `CC` and `CFLAGS` for C compiler settings
* `CXX` and `CPPFLAGS`/`CXXLAGS` for C++ compiler settings
* `CMAKE_ARGS` for CMake settings (works for catkin_tools and colcon)

If you need catkin_tools-specific settings, especially `--no-install`, you should use the [legacy](https://github.com/ros-industrial/industrial_ci/tree/legacy) version.
Or even better: Add support for the install space.

### CATKIN_PARALLEL_JOBS

This is not supported anymore (see [job control](#job-control)]) as well.
Just try your build without this setting.
If it does not work, you should review the package dependencies in your repository.

### CATKIN_PARALLEL_TEST_JOBS

This is not supported anymore (see [job control](#job-control)]) as well.
Just try your build without this setting.
Please [open an issue](https://github.com/ros-industrial/industrial_ci/issues/new) if you really depend on this.

### CMAKE_ARGS

This variable was introduced recently and is still supported, but its content will be passed to all workspaces.
`DOWNSTREAM_CMAKE_ARGS`, `TARGET_CMAKE_ARGS` and `UPSTREAM_CMAKE_ARGS` can be used for more fine-grained control.

### DOCKER_BASE_IMAGE

This variable is still supported, but the [workspace layout has changed](#workspace-layout).

### DOCKER_FILE

This variable is still supported, but the [workspace layout has changed](#workspace-layout).

### DOCKER_IMAGE

This variable is still supported, but the [workspace layout has changed](#workspace-layout).

### HASHKEY_SKS

Will only be used if [`APTKEY_STORE_HTTPS`](#aptkey_store_https) is not set.

### NOT_TEST_INSTALL

This feature was removed, please use the [legacy](https://github.com/ros-industrial/industrial_ci/tree/legacy) version.

### PKGS_DOWNSTREAM

This variable is not supported anymore.
Instead, you could specify `DOWNSTREAM_WORKSPACE` (see [workspace management](index.rst#workspace-management)).

### ROSINSTALL_FILENAME

This variable is deprecated, and should get migrated.

If you do not set `UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE=file` as well, `ROSINSTALL_FILENAME` can just be removed.
Otherwise, set `UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE` to the value of `$ROSINSTALL_FILENAME` or `$ROSINSTALL_FILENAME.$ROS_DISTRO` explicitly (no auto-branching anymore).
If your rosinstall file contains your target repository as well, you might want to [filter](index.rst#workspace-management) it out:
`UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE=my_file_name -path_to_target_repo`.

### ROS_PARALLEL_JOBS

This variable does not get processed by `industrial_ci` anymore, instead it just gets passed to the build tool.
Just try your build without this setting.
If it does not work, you should review the package dependencies in your repository.

### ROS_PARALLEL_TEST_JOBS

This is not supported anymore (see [job control](#job-control)]) as well.
Just try your build without this setting.
Please [open an issue](https://github.com/ros-industrial/industrial_ci/issues/new) if you really depend on this.

### ROS_REPOSITORY_PATH

This variable is supported as-is.
If it is set to `http://packages.ros.org/ros-shadow-fixed/ubuntu`, it could get shortened to `ROS_REPO=ros-shadow-fixed`.
If it is set to `http://packages.ros.org/ros/ubuntu`, it can be removed or replaced by `ROS_REPO=ros` (default) to make `industrial_ci` use the [official ROS Docker](https://hub.docker.com/_/ros) images, if possible.

### TARGET_PKGS

This variable is not supported anymore.
Instead, you could remove the unrelated folders (see [workspace management](index.rst#workspace-management)).

### UBUNTU_OS_CODE_NAME

Still works, but is deprecated. Just substitute it with `OS_CODE_NAME`

### UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE

`UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE=debian` is superfluous and can simply get removed.
In case of `UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE=file` it can get set to the value of `$ROSINSTALL_FILENAME` (default: .travis.rosinstall) or `$ROSINSTALL_FILENAME.$ROS_DISTRO` explicitly (no auto-branching anymore).

If your rosinstall file contains your target repository as well, you might want to [filter](index.rst#workspace-management) it out:
`UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE=my_file_name_or_URL -path_to_target_repo`.

### USE_DEB

`USE_DEB=true` is superfluous and can simply get removed.
`USE_DEB=false` is the same as [`UPSTREAM_WORKSPACE=file`] and should [get migrated](#upstream_workspace).

### USE_MOCKUP

Is not used anymore, just substitute it with `TARGET_WORKSPACE`

### VERBOSE_OUTPUT

Is only implemented for `BUILDER=catkin_tools`

### VERBOSE_TESTS

Is only implemented for `BUILDER=catkin_tools`
